[RF Docs] Active Record Query Interface (#56341)
rails/rails: guides/source/active_record_querying.md

Reviewer: Can we add a `default_scope` to Book instead?
This makes the examples a bit clearer because we don't need the author:
```suggestion
class Book < ApplicationRecord
  default_scope { order(year_published: :desc) }
end
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT * FROM books GROUP BY author_id, id
```

Reviewer: Not sure if a comment is the best here, but I think we need to mention that the book is reloaded here:
```suggestion
# Reload book with a lock before yielding.
book.with_lock do
```

Reviewer: If we link it earlier we could remove the link here?
```suggestion
There are multiple ways to use the `joins` method.
```

Reviewer: I think it would be nice to have a single introduction sentence for the join examples:

```suggestion

Pass the name of the association to join a single table:

```

Reviewer: Maybe first explain the "Inner join" again for clarity?
```suggestion
Inner joins will only return records that have the associated records.

If you want to select a set of records, whether or not they have associated
records, you can use the [`left_outer_joins`][] method.
```

Reviewer: Maybe expand slightly on this explanation and highlight that an empty where is required?
```suggestion
To use `where.associated`, begin with an empty `where` followed by `associated` with the association name:
```

Reviewer: I think we should probably explain the `N` here somewhere.
Maybe someting like:
```suggestion
Retrieving a list of records N (where N is a number greater that 1) in a single query can sometimes trigger N extra queries: one for each record.
Consider the following code, which finds 10 (N) books and prints their authors' last_name:
```

Reviewer: Maybe mention that this is the same as `includes` for the simple cases. Otherwise readers will have a hard time finding the difference.
```suggestion
With `preload`, Active Record loads each specified association using one query per association. This is exactly the same as what `includes` will do when there are no conditions.
```

Reviewer: I think we show most configuration overrides as code example blocks:
````suggestion
To enable strict loading for all relations, change the configuration to `true`:
```ruby
config.active_record.strict_loading_by_default = true
```
````

Reviewer: ````suggestion
To send violations to the logger instead, change it to `:log`:
```ruby
config.active_record.action_on_strict_loading_violation = :log
```
````

Reviewer: `recent` doesn't seem to get used, so we can probably delete it?
```suggestion
```

Reviewer: This example doesn't add much I think.
It uses the uncommon `load` method and doesn't show the resulting query.
The next `irb` block is much clearer.
```suggestion
```

Another option would be showing a Book with a default scope (although this example is shown a lot). This would also clarify the `unscoped` examples, particularly the block example.

```suggestion
```ruby
class Book < ApplicationRecord
  default_scope { where(out_of_print: false) }
end
```

```

Reviewer: Maybe clarify the methods are dynamic?
Also, this whole section is duplicated in 3.1.6.
```suggestion
Dynamic Finder Methods
----------------------
```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
For example:

```ruby
Customer.find_by_first_name_and_orders_count("Ryan", 5)
```
````

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to find both by `first_name` and `orders_count`, you can chain these finders together by simply typing `_and_` between the fields.
```

Reviewer: To me these examples are a bit easier to read with code example blocks (Ah, I already made the same suggestions in 3.1.6 😄)

````suggestion
You can specify an exclamation point (`!`) on the end of the dynamic finders
to get them to raise an `ActiveRecord::RecordNotFound` error if they do not return any records, like:

```ruby
Customer.find_by_first_name!("Ryan")
```
````

Reviewer: This example is a bit confusing to me. Of course pluck doesn't work on `name`.
I think we should highlight that overriding attribute methods work with `map` but not with `pluck`:
````suggestion
```ruby
class Customer < ApplicationRecord
  def first_name
    "I am #{super}"
  end
end
```

```irb
irb> Customer.select(:first_name).map &:first_name
=> ["I am David", "I am Jeremy", "I am Jose"]

irb> Customer.pluck(:first_name)
=> ["David", "Jeremy", "Jose"]
```
````

Reviewer: I would expect to see the generated SQL here as well:
```suggestion
Customer.exists?(1)
# SELECT 1 AS one FROM `customers` WHERE `users`.`id` = 1 LIMIT 1
```

* How to find records using a variety of methods and conditions.
* How to specify the order, retrieved attributes, grouping, and other properties of the found records.
* How to retrieve records in batches to efficiently process large datasets.
* How to join tables and work with data from multiple tables.
* How to use eager loading to reduce the number of database queries needed for data retrieval.
* How to use scopes to create reusable query logic.
* How to use method chaining to use multiple Active Record methods together.
* How to check for the existence of particular records.
* How to use pluck, pick, and ids to efficiently retrieve specific values.
* How to perform various calculations on Active Record models.

> * How to use locking mechanisms for concurrent access control.

Reviewer: This is a pretty long list right now.
Can we remove some of these? For example:
```
* How to use method chaining to use multiple Active Record methods together.
* How to check for the existence of particular records.
```

Maybe combine the following into a single item?
```
* How to retrieve records in batches to efficiently process large datasets.
* How to use eager loading to reduce the number of database queries needed for data retrieval.
* How to use pluck, pick, and ids to efficiently retrieve specific values.
```
as:
```
* How to retrieve data efficiently.
```

end
```

NOTE: These models use `id` as the primary key, unless specified otherwise.

![Diagram of all of the bookstore
models](images/active_record_querying/bookstore_models.png)

> Retrieving Objects from the Database

Reviewer: @Ridhwana A final thing I just noticed is that we use both Object and Record for the same thing in this guide. I think we should stick to Record for consistency.
There are a lot more occurences of Object in this guide that  should probably be replaced as well.
```suggestion
Retrieving Records from the Database
```

Author: Hey @p8, thanks for catching this!  I’ve changed most of the model-instance wording to Record, see https://github.com/rails/rails/pull/56341/commits/95a8a9be6ece357a4e4634ccbeb3b7b331152f2d, but I left a few object usages where that term is still accurate. For example: ActiveRecord::Relation and ActiveRecord::Result should still be described as objects, or generic lifecycle/association-proxy wording also still uses object where it doesn’t mean a model record.

Reviewer: Thanks @Ridhwana ! I think that makes sense.

The `find` method will raise an `ActiveRecord::RecordNotFound` exception if no matching record is found.

You can also use this method to query for multiple objects. Call the `find` method and pass in an array of primary keys. The return value will be an array containing all of the matching records for the supplied _primary keys_. For example:

```irb
# Find the customers with primary keys 1 and 10.

> irb> customers = Customer.find([1, 10]) # OR Customer.find(1, 10)

Reviewer: Can you replace all irb prompts with `store(dev)`?
The app name and env is now the default, and store seems to make sense for a bookstore.
```suggestion
store(dev)> customers = Customer.find([1, 10]) # OR Customer.find(1, 10)
```

### `any?`

You can also use `any?` to check for existence on a model or relation.

If the records have already been loaded, `any?` will use the in-memory records
instead of querying the database again:

```irb
store(dev)> orders = Order.limit(10).load
SELECT orders.* FROM orders LIMIT 10
store(dev)> orders.any?
=> true
```

```irb
store(dev)> Order.any?
SELECT 1 FROM orders LIMIT 1
=> true

store(dev)> Order.shipped.any?
SELECT 1 FROM orders WHERE orders.status = 0 LIMIT 1
=> true

store(dev)> Book.where(out_of_print: true).any?
=> true

store(dev)> Customer.first.orders.any?
=> true
```

### `many?`

You can use `many?` to check whether more than one record exists on a model or
relation. It uses SQL `count` unless the records have already been loaded.

```irb
store(dev)> Order.many?
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM (SELECT 1 FROM orders LIMIT 2)
=> true

store(dev)> Order.shipped.many?
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM (SELECT 1 FROM orders WHERE orders.status = 0 LIMIT 2)
=> true

store(dev)> Book.where(out_of_print: true).many?
=> true

store(dev)> Customer.first.orders.many?
=> true
```

[`exists?`]:
    https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/FinderMethods.html#method-i-exists-3F

> ### Retrieving Multiple Records in Batches

Reviewer: @Ridhwana I just noticed this. Shouldn't this section be moved under: "Retrieving Records from the Database"?
So we'd have:
- Retrieving a Single Record
- Retrieving Multiple Records
- Understanding Method Chaining
- Finding Records and Values
- Retrieving Multiple Records in Batches

Or:
- Retrieving a Single Record
- Retrieving Multiple Records
- Retrieving Multiple Records in Batches
- Understanding Method Chaining
- Finding Records and Values

SELECT isbn, out_of_print FROM books
```

Be careful because this also means you're initializing a model object with only the fields that you've selected. If you attempt to access a field that is not in the initialized record you'll receive the following error:

```ruby
ActiveModel::MissingAttributeError: missing attribute '<attribute>' for Book
```
In the above example, `<attribute>` would be the requested attribute. The `id` method will not raise the `ActiveRecord::MissingAttributeError`, so exercise caution when working with associations, which need the `id` method to function properly.

Limiting Records
----------------

To limit the number of records retrieved from the database you can use the [`limit`][] and [`offset`][] methods on the relation.

The limit method specifies how many records should be returned, while offset determines how many records to skip before retrieving results. For example:

```ruby
Customer.limit(5)
```

> This example will return a maximum of 5 customers, and as it specifies no offset first 5 in the table will be returned. The SQL it executes looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example will return a maximum of 5 customers, and as it specifies no offset, the first 5 in the table will be returned. The SQL it executes looks like this:
```

```sql
SELECT * FROM customers LIMIT 5
```

Adding `offset` to that will skip the first 30 records and return the next 5, starting from the 31st record:

```ruby
Customer.limit(5).offset(30)
```

The SQL generated by this query looks like:

```sql
SELECT * FROM customers LIMIT 5 OFFSET 30
```

If you would like to only return a single record for each unique value in a given field, you can use [`distinct`][]:

```ruby
Customer.select(:last_name).distinct
```

This will generate SQL like:

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT last_name FROM customers
```

You can also remove the uniqueness constraint:

```ruby
# Returns a unique list of last_names
query = Customer.select(:last_name).distinct

# Returns a list of all last_names, even if there are duplicates
query.distinct(false)
```

Grouping Records
----------------

If you want to group records, you can use the [`group`][] method to apply a `GROUP BY` clause to the SQL generated by the relation.

For example, if you want to find a collection of orders grouped by status:

```ruby

> Order.select("status").group("status")

Reviewer: It might be clearer if we ignore the `select` in this example (and the following SQL), as that is not required.
```suggestion
Order.group("status")
```

SELECT * FROM books WHERE id > 100 ORDER BY id desc LIMIT 20
```

You can also unscope specific `where` clauses. For example, this will remove the `id` condition from the where clause:

```ruby
Book.where(id: 10, out_of_print: false).unscope(where: :id)
```

This will generate the following SQL:

```sql
SELECT books.* FROM books WHERE out_of_print = false
```

A relation which has used `unscope` will affect any relation into which it is merged. In the following example the `order` is removed from the original relation:

```ruby
Book.order("id desc").merge(Book.unscope(:order))
```

This will generate the following SQL:

```sql

> SELECT books.* FROM books ORDER BY id desc

Reviewer: I think the order should be removed here, as it's unscoped:
```suggestion
SELECT books.* FROM books
```

```

[`unscope`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/QueryMethods.html#method-i-unscope

### `unscoped`

If we wish to remove all scoping for any reason we can use the [`unscoped`][] method. This is
especially useful if a `default_scope` is specified in the model but should not be
applied for this particular query. However, `unscoped` can be used even when no scopes are present.

```ruby
Book.unscoped.load
```

This method removes all scoping and will do a normal query on the table.

```ruby
Book.unscoped.all
```

```ruby
Book.where(out_of_print: true).unscoped.all
```

Both of the above will generate the following SQL:

```sql
SELECT books.* FROM books
```

> `unscoped` can also accept a block:

Reviewer: Maybe explain what happens here (I've copied the sentence from the API docs):
```suggestion
`unscoped` can also accept a block. All queries inside the block will not use the previously set scopes.
```

```ruby

> Book.unscoped { Book.out_of_print }

Reviewer: Maybe add a scope that gets unscoped here?
```suggestion
Book.in_print.unscoped { Book.out_of_print }
```

> Author.find(10).books

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Book.all
```

```

This will generate the following SQL:

```sql
SELECT * FROM authors WHERE id = 10 LIMIT 1

> SELECT * FROM books WHERE author_id = 10 ORDER BY year_published DESC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT * FROM books ORDER BY year_published DESC
```

```

You can use the `reorder` clause to specify a different way to order the books:

```ruby

> Author.find(10).books.reorder("year_published ASC")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Book.reorder("year_published ASC")
```

> SELECT * FROM books WHERE author_id = 10 ORDER BY year_published ASC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT * FROM books ORDER BY year_published ASC
```

> Book.group(:author).regroup(:id)

Reviewer: I think this should reference the foreign_key column:
```suggestion
Book.group(:author_id).regroup(:id)
```

```

The SQL that would be executed groups by the regrouped columns:

```sql
SELECT * FROM books GROUP BY id
```

If a regular `group` is used instead of the `regroup` clause, the group clauses are combined together:

```ruby

> Book.group(:author).group(:id)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Book.group(:author_id).group(:id)
```

c1.first_name = "Sandra"
c1.save

c1.lock_version # => 1
c2.lock_version # => 0

c2.first_name = "Michael"
c2.save  # Raises an ActiveRecord::StaleObjectError
```

> You're then responsible for dealing with the conflict by rescuing the exception and either rolling back, merging, or otherwise apply the business logic needed to resolve the conflict.

Reviewer: I think the verb form here should be the same as "rolling back" and "merging":
```suggestion
You're then responsible for dealing with the conflict by rescuing the exception and either rolling back, merging, or otherwise applying the business logic needed to resolve the conflict.
```

Joining Tables
--------------

Joining tables allows you to retrieve records from multiple tables in a single query, for example, fetching books together with their authors.

Active Record provides two finder methods for specifying `JOIN` clauses on the

> resulting SQL; `joins` and `left_outer_joins`:

Reviewer: In other sections we link the methods the first time they are mentioned.
Maybe:
```suggestion
resulting SQL; [`joins`][] and [`left_outer_joins`][]:
```

Book.joins(:reviews)
```

This produces the following SQL:

```sql
SELECT books.* FROM books
  INNER JOIN reviews ON reviews.book_id = books.id
```

The SQL query will return a Book object for all books with reviews.

NOTE: You will see duplicate books if a book has more than one review.  If you want unique books, you can use `Book.joins(:reviews).distinct`.

> #### Joining Multiple Associations

Reviewer: I think this heading level should be the same as "Joining a Single Association"

```suggestion
##### Joining Multiple Associations
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Pass multiple association names to join multiple tables:

```

```ruby
Book.joins(:author, :reviews)
```

This produces the following SQL:

```sql
SELECT books.* FROM books
  INNER JOIN authors ON authors.id = books.author_id
  INNER JOIN reviews ON reviews.book_id = books.id
```

The SQL query will return all books that have an author _and_ at least one review.

NOTE: You will see duplicate books if a book has more than one review.  If you want unique books, you can use `Book.joins(:reviews).distinct`.

##### Joining Nested Associations (Single Level)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Pass a hash of association names to join tables on other joined tables:

```

```ruby
Book.joins(reviews: :customer)
```

This produces the following SQL:

```sql
SELECT books.* FROM books
  INNER JOIN reviews ON reviews.book_id = books.id
  INNER JOIN customers ON customers.id = reviews.customer_id
```

The SQL query will return all books that have a review by a customer.

##### Joining Nested Associations (Multiple Level)

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For more complex joining, use a combination of hashes and arrays:

```

> INNER JOIN suppliers ON suppliers.id = books.supplier_id

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  INNER JOIN suppliers ON suppliers.id = books.supplier_id
```

Customer.where.associated(:reviews)
```

This produces the following SQL:

```sql
SELECT customers.* FROM customers
  INNER JOIN reviews ON reviews.customer_id = customers.id
  WHERE reviews.id IS NOT NULL
```

The SQL query will return all customers that have made at least one review.

> You can use `where.missing` to select records that do not have an association:

Reviewer: Maybe highlight that `where.missing` is the opposite?
```suggestion
`where.missing` is the opposite of `where.associated`.
You can use `where.missing` to select records that do not have an association:
```

```ruby
Customer.where.missing(:reviews)
```

This produces the following SQL:

```sql
SELECT customers.* FROM customers
  LEFT OUTER JOIN reviews ON reviews.customer_id = customers.id
  WHERE reviews.id IS NULL
```

The SQL query will return all customers that have not made any reviews.

If a join is already defined `associated` will use that join instead:

> ```ruby

Reviewer: This is missing a linebreak:

<img width="826" height="229" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/855250e6-a48d-4d77-ae5a-25cf6049c29b" />

```suggestion

```ruby
```

# associated will use LEFT JOIN for this query instead of using JOIN
Post.left_joins(:author).where.associated(:author)
```

Eager Loading Associations
--------------------------

> Eager loading is the mechanism for loading the associated records of the objects returned by `ActiveRecord::Relation` using as few queries as possible.

Reviewer: Sometimes it's better to have separate queries instead of as single join, so eager loading is about 'most performant' instead of as 'few queries'.
```suggestion
Eager loading is the mechanism for loading the associated records of the objects returned by `ActiveRecord::Relation` using the most performant queries possible.
```

> 

Reviewer: Not sure what would be a good way to describe it here, but `includes` is the preferred method as it will do either a `preload` or an `eager_load` depending on the conditions.
Maybe an info block?
```suggestion

INFO: Prefer using `includes`, as it is a higher level method that will do either an `preload` or an `eager_load` depending on the situation.

```

#### Eager Loading Multiple Associations

Active Record lets you eager load any number of associations with a single `ActiveRecord::Relation` call by using an array, hash, or a nested hash of array/hash with the `includes` method.

> ##### Array of Multiple Associations

Reviewer: This section is pretty heading heavy, maybe change them to regular sentences instead?
Unlike short statements with headings, this to me also reads more like guiding text:
```suggestion
To eager load multiple associations pass an array of association names:
```

end
```

The `default_scope` is also applied while creating/building a record
when the scope arguments are given as a `Hash`. It is not applied while

> updating a record. For example, if you have a `default_scope` that sets `out_of_print` to `false`, and you create a new book with the `out_of_print` attribute set to `true`, the `default_scope` will be applied:

Reviewer: The sentence about "not applying the default_scope while updating a record", is easily overlooked.
Maybe add a linebreak?
```suggestion
updating a record.

For example, if you have a `default_scope` that sets `out_of_print` to `false`, and you create a new book with the `out_of_print` attribute set to `true`, the `default_scope` will be applied:
```

=> #<Book id: nil, out_of_print: nil>
```

Be aware that when scope arguments are given as an `Array`, `default_scope` cannot convert the arguments to a `Hash` for default attribute assignment. For example:

> ```ruby

Reviewer: This needs an extra linebreak:

<img width="819" height="145" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2f24050e-7bc2-41dd-8722-467348d24289" />

````suggestion

```ruby
````

### Merging of Scopes

> You can chain small, reusable scopes to build more specific queries. Scopes can call other scopes:

Reviewer: In this section we first combine two scopes into a new scope. Later we call multiple scopes on a single model.

I think it makes more sense to swap these: first show an example of combining scopes, then show an example of creating a new scope for these combined scopes (using the same example fir clarity?).

> ```ruby

Reviewer: Maybe highlight the line that combines other scopes:
```suggestion
```ruby#4
```

irb> Book.in_print
SELECT books.* FROM books WHERE (year_published >= 1969) AND books.out_of_print = false

irb> Book.where("price > 50")

> SELECT books.* FROM books WHERE (year_published >= 1969) AND (price > 50)

Reviewer: Not sure this third example adds much
```suggestion
```

If we really want another example I would add an example that uses the same columns as the default_scope:
```suggestion
irb> Book.where(year_published: 2020)
SELECT books.* FROM books WHERE (year_published >= 1969) AND (year_published = 2020)
```

> An enum lets you define an Array of values for an attribute and refer to them by name.  The actual value stored in the database is an integer that has been mapped to one of the values.

Reviewer: Maybe start with explaining the use-case for `Enums`?
```suggestion
Sometimes you might want to restrict the value of an attribute to a predefined list of values.

An enum lets you define an Array of values for an attribute and refer to them by name.  The actual value stored in the database is an integer that has been mapped to one of the values.
```

=> #<ActiveRecord::Relation> # all orders with status != :shipped
```

> Predicate methods are created automatically for each enum value that query whether the model has that value for the `status` enum:

Reviewer: Maybe explain predicate methods?
```suggestion
Predicate methods (methods that return true of false) are created automatically for each enum value that query whether the model has that value for the `status` enum:
```

Or maybe change the wording the make it clearer they return true of false?

```suggestion
Predicate methods are created automatically for each enum value and return whether the model has that value for the `status` enum:
```

=> true
```

You can read more about enums in the [ActiveRecord::Enum documentation](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Enum.html).

[`enum`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Enum.html#method-i-enum

> Understanding Method Chaining

Reviewer: This section feels a bit late in the guide. There are multiple sections that use method chaining, then we explain other concepts like eager loading, scopes and enums, before we end up here.
To me it feels like it should be a sub section of "Retrieving Objects from the Database"? What do you think?

Author: Agreed!

LIMIT 1
```

NOTE: If a query matches multiple records, `find_by` will fetch only the first
one and ignore the others, as specified by the `LIMIT 1` statement above.

> Finding or Building a New Object

Reviewer: To me it seems this whole section belongs as a top section after "Retrieving Objects from the Database". There is a lot of overlap in context.

Author: ✅

--------------------------------

It's common that you need to find a record or create it if it doesn't exist. You can do that with the `find_or_create_by` and `find_or_create_by!` methods.

### `find_or_create_by`

The [`find_or_create_by`][] method checks whether a record with the specified attributes exists. If it doesn't, then `create` is called.

Suppose you want to find a customer named "Andy", and if there's no customer with that name, then you want to create one. You can do this by running:

```irb
irb> Customer.find_or_create_by(first_name: "Andy")
=> #<Customer id: 5, first_name: "Andy", last_name: nil, title: nil, visits: 0, orders_count: nil, lock_version: 0, created_at: "2019-01-17 07:06:45", updated_at: "2019-01-17 07:06:45">

> ```

Reviewer: Nitpick. It's common to have multiple customers named Andy.
I know this is just an example, but I think examples make more impact with typical use cases.
For example (the rest of the text would probably need to be changed as well)

```suggestion
Suppose you want to find a customer with the email "andy@example.com", and if there's no customer with that email, then you want to create one. You can do this by running:

```irb
irb> Customer.find_or_create_by(email: "andy@example.com")
=> #<Customer id: 5, email: "andy@example.com", last_name: nil, title: nil, visits: 0, orders_count: nil, lock_version: 0, created_at: "2019-01-17 07:06:45", updated_at: "2019-01-17 07:06:45">
```
```

The SQL generated by this method will look like this:

```sql
SELECT * FROM customers WHERE (customers.first_name = "Andy") LIMIT 1
BEGIN
INSERT INTO customers (created_at, first_name, locked, orders_count, updated_at) VALUES ("2011-08-30 05:22:57", "Andy", 1, NULL, "2011-08-30 05:22:57")

> COMMIT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SELECT * FROM customers WHERE (customers.email = "andy@example.com") LIMIT 1
BEGIN
INSERT INTO customers (created_at, email, locked, orders_count, updated_at) VALUES ("2011-08-30 05:22:57", "andy@example.com", 1, NULL, "2011-08-30 05:22:57")
COMMIT
```

```irb
irb> Customer.create_or_find_by(first_name: "Andy")
=> #<Customer id: 5, first_name: "Andy", last_name: nil, title: nil, visits: 0, orders_count: nil, lock_version: 0, created_at: "2019-01-17 07:06:45", updated_at: "2019-01-17 07:06:45">
```

The SQL generated by this method looks like this on first call:

```sql
BEGIN
INSERT INTO customers (created_at, first_name, locked, orders_count, updated_at) VALUES ("2011-08-30 05:22:57", "Andy", 1, NULL, "2011-08-30 05:22:57")
COMMIT
```

If the record already exists (due to a uniqueness constraint), the creation will fail and the method will find the existing record:

```sql
BEGIN
INSERT INTO customers (created_at, first_name, locked, orders_count, updated_at) VALUES ("2011-08-30 05:22:57", "Andy", 1, NULL, "2011-08-30 05:22:57")
ROLLBACK
SELECT * FROM customers WHERE (customers.first_name = "Andy") LIMIT 1
```

The key difference between `create_or_find_by` and `find_or_create_by` is the order of operations and atomicity:

> - `find_or_create_by`: First tries to find, then creates if not found. This is **not atomic** and can have race conditions where duplicate records may be created.

Reviewer: This needs a linebreak for markup:

<img width="841" height="141" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/39d0da7c-7f88-40f6-8d0f-e2732c18df12" />

```suggestion

- `find_or_create_by`: First tries to find, then creates if not found. This is **not atomic** and can have race conditions where duplicate records may be created.
```

[`create_or_find_by`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Relation.html#method-i-create_or_find_by

### `create_or_find_by!`

You can also use [`create_or_find_by!`][] to raise an exception if the record creation fails for reasons other than uniqueness constraint violations. This is similar to `find_or_create_by!` but with the create-first, atomic approach.

```irb
irb> Customer.create_or_find_by!(first_name: "Andy", orders_count: 5)
=> #<Customer id: 5, first_name: "Andy", orders_count: 5, ...>
```

If a validation fails during creation (other than uniqueness), an exception will be raised:

```irb
irb> Customer.create_or_find_by!(first_name: "Andy", orders_count: nil)
ActiveRecord::RecordInvalid: Validation failed: Orders count can't be blank
```

However, if the failure is due to a uniqueness constraint violation, it will find and return the existing record (just like `create_or_find_by`), rather than raising an exception.

[`create_or_find_by!`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Relation.html#method-i-create_or_find_by-21

> Finding Records and Values

Reviewer: To me it seems this section is should be shown a lot earlier.
I think it would fit as a subsection of "Retrieving Objects from the Database", as these methods also describe getting objects from the database.
What do you think?

object would return you an array of hashes where each hash indicates a record.

```irb
irb> Customer.lease_connection.select_all("SELECT first_name, created_at FROM customers WHERE id = \"1\"").to_a

> ```

Reviewer: The example hasn't ended here yet, so these mess up the markup:
```suggestion
```

The above returns `false` if the `customers` table is empty and `true` otherwise.

> ### `any?` and `many?`

Reviewer: Maybe split this section into two separate sections (one for `any?` and one for `many?`)?
It's easier if the examples only use one method instead of two.

Also, I think we should mention `any` and `many`  don't talk to the database if the records are already loaded:
```ruby
users = User.limit(10).load
# SELECT `users`.* FROM `users` LIMIT 10
users.any?
=> true
```

Calculating results in the database will generally be more performant.

This section uses [`count`][] as an example method in this preamble, but the same patterns apply to all calculation methods.

All calculation methods work directly on a model:

```irb
irb> Customer.count
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM customers
# => 3753
```

Or on a relation:

```irb
irb> Customer.where(first_name: "Ryan").count
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM customers WHERE (first_name = "Ryan")
# => 17
```

You can also use various finder methods on a relation for performing complex calculations:

```irb
irb> Customer.includes("orders").where(first_name: "Ryan", orders: { status: "shipped" }).count
```

Which will execute:

```sql
SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT customers.id) FROM customers
  LEFT OUTER JOIN orders ON orders.customer_id = customers.id
  WHERE (customers.first_name = "Ryan" AND orders.status = 0)
```

assuming that Order has `enum status: [ :shipped, :being_packed, :cancelled ]`.

### `count`

If you want to see how many records are in your model's table you could call `Customer.count` and that will return the number.

> If you want to be more specific and find all the customers with a title present in the database you can use `Customer.count(:title)`.

Reviewer: Some of the similar examples in this section use a code example block (although with a string instead of a symbol):
````suggestion
If you want to be more specific and find all the customers with a title present in the database you can use pass the `:title`:

```ruby
Customer.count(:title)`.
```
````

```ruby
Order.sum("subtotal")
# => 12345.67
```

[`sum`]: https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveRecord/Calculations.html#method-i-sum

Running .explain
----------------

You can run [`explain`][] on a relation. EXPLAIN output varies for each database.

You can also chain `explain` with calculation methods like [`count`][], [`first`][], [`last`][], [`average`][], [`maximum`][], [`minimum`][], [`sum`][], and [`pluck`][] to see the query plan for those operations:

```ruby
Customer.where(active: true).explain.count
Customer.order(:created_at).explain.first

> ```

Reviewer: This describes the more complex examples of using explain on the calculation methods.
I would expect to see this after the more simple example of explain with the output of the command that is coming next.
